Revise `SelectPanel` documentation for new version (#708)
primer/design: content/components/selectpanel.mdx

import {Box} from '@primer/react'
import ComponentLayout from '~/src/layouts/component-layout'
export default ComponentLayout

## Overview

> The select panel enables users to choose one or multiple items from a list and can be enhanced with additional controls like a search input to speed up selection. Offering more flexibility than an [Action Menu](/components/action-menu), it stays open after a selection and allows for the inclusion of extra form controls.

Reviewer: I don't think this conveys the original prose. ActionMenu is different from SelectPanel, the two should not be conflated as they offer different use cases. I don't think it is sufficient to say SelectPanel offers more controls because it implies that ActionMenu could be used in its place, which is, IMO, not true. For example ActionMenu is immediately reactive (and so useful for non-destructive writes, e.g. filtering) while SelectPanel requires the user to make choices then commit.

Author: > It is often used to augment information of a wide variety of items.

The initial phrasing is vague and the idea is to be more specific, but if it's not correct, that obviously doesn't help. Is there a good, distinct way of explaining the difference between the two to avoid any ambiguity here that you could think of?

export default ComponentLayout
import {AccessibilityLink} from '~/src/components/accessibility-link'

## Overview

The select panel enables you to choose one or multiple items from a list, and can be enhanced with additional controls, like a search input, to speed up the selection process. It's widely used for augmenting information on a variety of items. Unlike an [action menu](/components/action-menu), which cannot include additional form controls and closes automatically after a selection, the select panel offers more flexibility.

> For example, you might use a select panel when assigning someone to a task, adding labels to an issue or pull request, or selecting a specific branch in a code repository. In contrast to an action menu, a select panel includes extra form controls and remains open after a selection is made.

Reviewer 2: I like that you're mentioning these changes that people come looking for!

export default ComponentLayout
import {AccessibilityLink} from '~/src/components/accessibility-link'

<Note>
  This component is currently under development in React and Rails and might not have all its functionality yet.
  Internally this epic can be tracked <a href="https://github.com/github/primer/issues/2396">here</a>.
</Note>

## Overview

The select panel allows you to select one or multiple items from a list, and it can be enhanced with additional controls like a search input to expedite the selection process. It is often used to augment information of a wide variety of items.

For instance, you may encounter a select panel when you need to assign someone to a task or add labels to an issue or pull request. It can also be utilized to select a specific branch in a code repository.

> It's important to understand the differences between the select panel and [action menu](/components/action-menu). The primary distinction lies in the fact that an action menu lacks the ability to include additional form controls and automatically closes after making a selection. Therefore, if you require a filterable list or the capability to make multiple selections at once, the select panel is the appropriate choice.

Reviewer 3: Kinda wish we still had this information. A lot of people do get confused about this.

Reviewer 3: `the capability to make multiple selections` is kinda wrong here as menu's support this too.

Author: Incorporated it in the first paragraph now.

>   src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/980622/d396ea70-d8a5-4e52-ae3e-7596a3ef39b6"

Reviewer 4: One note for this image, declaritive -> declarative

<img
  width="960"
  alt="Two examples of the select panel are shown. The first example is a simple version consisting of a header with a close button, a multi-select list with checkboxes for individual items, and a footer containing cancel and apply buttons. The second example is more complex, featuring a titled 'Switch context' panel with a close button, a search input, and header tabs labeled 'Branches' and 'Tags'. The list below the header allows single selection and closes the select panel upon clicking a branch. The footer contains a link to view all branches."
  src="https://github.com/github/primer/assets/980622/d6ae4bd9-5252-4aa9-b8d3-cfcb1887e488"
/>

### Trigger

<img
  width="960"
  alt="Various trigger examples are displayed. The first example showcases an icon button with a cog icon. The second example presents a button with the internal label 'Assignees: 2 people'. The third example features a button with the external label 'Assignees' and an internal button label stating '2 people'. Lastly, the image shows an action menu with two items: 'Set labels...' and 'Delete...'."
  src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/980622/f2867468-4606-4999-8ea7-21860e50051d"
/>

> Select panels can be activated by either a regular [button](/components/button), [icon button](/components/icon-button) or [action menu item](/components/action-menu). If the button is intended to represent the current selection, it's crucial to have a label associated with it, either internally (within the button) or externally (adjacent to the button).

Author: > and a select panel can't be built without a trigger.

I'm not sure I understand the deliberation here. What would be the alternative, to render it on page load?

  src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/3369400/2f778a44-c95c-4840-ac7e-96817e83b185"
/>

Use the search feature to manage extensive lists. This approach helps to prevent potential performance issues, particularly since this component does not support virtualization.

> The indeterminate selections feature is valuable for bulk actions on lists. For instance, if you have 20 selected items and some of them are tagged with different labels, an indeterminate checkbox (indicated by a horizontal line) appears for labels that are not uniformly applied to all items.

Reviewer 4: From a technical perspective, wanted to ask how do we support indeterminate states on an option in listbox?

  src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/980622/928a4bb2-c3f8-4620-9e37-42d9b91204c1"
/>

> For single-item selection, if no consequential actions follow, the panel may close immediately, indicated by a checkmark on the selected item. However, when the selection triggers significant actions or the footer has additional elements (like a checkbox), declarative buttons are necessary. In such cases, the behavior is indicated visually by radio buttons, which allows users to confirm their choices, before submitting their selection.

Reviewer: I'd like to encourage people towards actionmenu for _these_ instances. Unless the list is large enough to warrant a type-ahead filter, then we should use actionmenu. One that springs to mind is License chooser which has maybe 10 licenses, and can display the list all at once without requiring typeahead.

Author: That makes sense. Since this section is focusing on the options of the component, we could create a new section under "[Usage guidelines](https://primer-3de09d22a0-26441320.drafts.github.io/components/selectpanel#usage-guidelines)" to point that out, thoughts?

Reviewer: Sounds like a good idea.

Author: More prominent and probably the best place in the [doc](https://primer-3de09d22a0-26441320.drafts.github.io/components/selectpanel):

![Screenshot showing the single select section with a info box that clarifies about action menu](https://github.com/primer/design/assets/3369400/b9031c69-ccb2-499d-997d-e7f62c8298b5)

  src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/980622/bfaa7eca-9a12-432d-9184-38f024a7cd32"
/>

> This option allows choosing multiple items and includes features like "select all" for quick selection/deselection and "indeterminate selections" for bulk actions. Implementing a search function is recommended over displaying extensive lists to avoid performance issues.

Author: Brought back the more detailed description but changed the order of it so that search comes first and "Select all" last. That way it's sorted by priority respectively likelihood of adoption scenario. Also swapped the examples in the image above that you provided me 🙇 to accompany that.

https://primer-3de09d22a0-26441320.drafts.github.io/components/selectpanel#list-multi-select

![Screenshot of the rendered section with the changes described above](https://github.com/primer/design/assets/3369400/be2353c3-b333-46ab-ac21-924149c3203c)

  src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/980622/ab147e61-7088-4113-99b6-740e9bcbfe40"
/>

> To summarize current selections, display selected items at the beginning of the list, particularly after clearing the search input or reopening the panel.

Author: I see, brought back the initial paragraph with slight changes in wording.

### Loading

Loading states should be used to indicate ongoing processes at various stages, enhancing user awareness and interaction understanding.

<img
  width="1668"
  alt="The image showcases 4 examples of loading states that can appear in the select panel.In all examples, the header displays a title 'Assign people,' a close button, and a search input field. Additionally, each example includes a footer with a cancel and save button. The first example replaces the list with a spinner and a description below it stating 'Fetching people...'. In the second example, the list is replaced by a shimmering skeleton loader, indicating that items will appear there shortly. The third example shows a value in the input field, and the magnifying glass at the beginning of the input field is replaced by a spinner. The list displays previously loaded items. The last example contains no value in the input field, and one item is selected in the list. However, in this case, the apply button is replaced by a spinner enclosed within a rectangle of the same size as the previous apply button."
  src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/980622/93b6b99c-368b-403c-b604-a1f50920a1ef"
/>

> 1. **Initial**: Used during initial data retrieval to avoid displaying an empty list.
> 2. **Initial Skeleton**: Used similarly for initial data retrieval, presenting a skeleton screen instead of an empty list.
> 3. **Searching/Filtering**: A minimal loading indicator is used during searches, allowing users to retain or continue their selections.
> 4. **Confirmation**: Essential when updates aren't instant or when there's no error messaging for failures, using a confirmation button to indicate update progress.
> 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
1. **Initial** is used during initial data retrieval to avoid displaying an empty list.
2. **Initial Skeleton**is used similarly for initial data retrieval, presenting a skeleton screen instead of an empty list.
3. **Searching/Filtering** uses a minimal loading indicator during searches, allowing users to retain or continue their selections.
4. **Confirmation spinner** is essential when updates aren't instant to indicate the progress of the update.

```

## Behavior

### Opening

> <img
>   width="960"
>   alt="Various trigger examples are displayed. The first example showcases an icon button with a cog icon. The second example presents a button with the internal label 'Assignees: 2 people'. The third example features a button with the external label 'Assignees' and an internal button label stating '2 people'. Lastly, the image shows an action menu with two items: 'Set labels...' and 'Delete...'."
>   src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/980622/f2867468-4606-4999-8ea7-21860e50051d"
> />
> 
> Select panels can be activated by regular [buttons](/components/button), [icon buttos](/components/icon-button), or [action menu items](/components/action-menu). Proper labeling is crucial for representing current selections, either internally (within the button) or externally (adjacent to the button). Focus will be placed on the first interactive element within the select panel.

Reviewer 5: This section should move back up to the options category of the document and be replaced with the opening behavior that was originally here. 

```suggestion
<img
  width="960"
  alt="Mouse cursor hovering over an icon button and a focused icon button with the space and enter keys visually below the icon button."
  src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/40274682/228910118-3d99fd0a-7b14-4e46-af48-f69bf76912e5.png"
/>

The select panel can be activated through a semantic button, providing mouse users with the ability to click on it, while keyboard users can activate it by pressing the space or enter key.

Additionally, the select panel can be triggered through an action menu. In this scenario, it is important for the action menu to promptly close as soon as the select panel is triggered.

<img
  width="960"
  alt="First select panel has focus applied to the search input with a blue 2px border. Second select panel has no visible focus ring as focus is brought to the H1 of the dialog."
  src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/980622/fd6a6028-2402-48cb-9d28-693c54f79ac5"
/>

Focus should be placed on the first interactive item within select panel.
```

<Note>

>   When the select panel is activated through an [action menu](/components/action-menu), it should be displayed as a centered dialog using the `dialog` property.

Reviewer 5: @siddharthkp that sounds right, because they're all dialogs.

</Note>

### Closing

> To close the select panel, pressing 'Esc', selecting a 'Cancel' option or clicking outside will close the dialog, and return focus to the trigger element without retaining or submitting any user input. Conversely, clicking 'Submit' or pressing 'Enter' while focused in the listbox will submit the user's input.

Reviewer 5: Why remove the helpful videos? Seeing it in action is useful for those who struggle to pull a visual from the words.

### Appearance

<img
  width="1338"
  alt="Two examples of multi-select panels. The first panel is anchored to a Set labels button. When the button is clicked, the multi-select panel opens adjacent to the button, allowing the user to make selections. The second panel is displayed as a centered dialog. When triggered, it appears at the center of the screen, allowing users to interact with the multi-select options in a modal-like interface."
  src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/980622/9fd418af-5050-423a-af8e-93b30571044a"
/>

> The select panel can appear as either an anchored or centered dialog, depending on the trigger source.

Reviewer 5: I don't know why this was removed, it's helpful information especially since we mention that it's dependent on the trigger source. 

```suggestion
The select panel can appear as either an anchored or centered dialog, depending on the trigger source.

- **Anchored dialog**: When triggered by a [button](/components/button) or [icon button](/components/icon-button) but never by an [action menu](/components/action-menu).
- **Centered dialog**: When triggered by a [button](/components/button), [icon button](/components/icon-button) or [action menu](/components/action-menu).

On smaller breakpoints the select panel should always appear as a modal dialog.
```

### Responsive

On smaller viewports, the select panel adapts to a full-screen or bottom sheet dialog. Enhanced sizes of buttons and list items improve usability on touch devices.

<Note>
  Ensure any additional action in the footer fits within a 320px viewport.

> </Note>

Reviewer 5: I don't know that this belongs in a note; all of the other notes on the page reference other components.

<img
  width="960"
  alt="On a mobile device, a multi-select panel is presented as a full-screen dialog. In the header, the search input is labeled as 'Search.' The first item in the list is annotated as 'Action list item (medium).' The entire list is labeled as role='listbox'. The footer is annotated as 'Declarative action (medium),' signifying that the elements are larger on mobile devices to ensure more comfortable interactions."
  src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/980622/ae6d19c2-7bfa-4357-be65-341c0728b9a8"
/>

See the [Dialog guidelines](https://primer.style/components/dialog) for more details.

## Usage guidelines

### Predictability

> Ensure clarity in the multi-selection process by using confirmatory actions. Avoid automatic updates or dialog closure upon selection.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Ensure clarity in the multi-selection process by using declarative actions. Avoid automatic updates or dialog closure upon selection.
```

By employing these loading states, users can have a better understanding of the process and remain informed throughout their interactions with the component.

## Behavior

### Triggers

<img
  width="960"
  alt="Various trigger examples are displayed. The first example showcases an icon button with a cog icon. The second example presents a button with the internal label 'Assignees: 2 people'. The third example features a button with the external label 'Assignees' and an internal button label stating '2 people'. Lastly, the image shows an action menu with two items: 'Set labels...' and 'Delete...'."
  src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/980622/f2867468-4606-4999-8ea7-21860e50051d"
/>

> Select panels can be activated by either a regular [button](/components/button), [icon button](/components/icon-button) or [action menu item](/components/action-menu). If the button is intended to represent the current selection, it's crucial to have a label associated with it, either internally (within the button) or externally (adjacent to the button).

Reviewer 2: Clarifying question: Are these intended as examples or a closed set?

Author: @siddharthkp good question, I didn't change anything to the existing content here, just condensed it a little. I assume that it was meant to be exclusive to these. Is there anything else that is missing here?

  </Dont>
</DoDontContainer>

### Click-to-dismiss behavior

> 

Reviewer 2: Instead of removing this section completely, should we replace this with the behavior we want now?

  </Dont>
</DoDontContainer>

> ### Click-to-dismiss behavior

Reviewer 2: 👀

Reviewer 5: I'm okay with leaving this out. What we're going with is the true and expected nature of a dialog, which is covered in the "Closing" section of this doc. (we should put the videos back in though)

  </Dont>
</DoDontContainer>

> Items marked with a checkmark icon, unlike those with radio buttons or checkboxes, signal that the selection panel will close automatically after a choice is made, excluding the use of declarative buttons.

Author: Agreed it's redundant.

  </Dont>
</DoDontContainer>

> Adding a checkbox to the footer requires declarative buttons, and items should feature visual radio buttons. While not actual radio buttons semantically, this design effectively indicates that the selection process continues after a choice is made.

Reviewer 2: (Not related to just this PR) Why is this the case @maximedegreve?

Also, this is only true for single selection, right? not multiple selection (because radio)

Reviewer 5: Yep!

  src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/980622/5328affe-0c35-4fbf-8f8e-ca3ee95083d4"
/>

The select panel supports various data clearance methods:

> 1. In single and multi-selection modes with a search/filter input, an [x-circle-fill](/foundations/icons/x-circle-fill-16) icon for quick clearing.
> 2. For multi-selection with search, a 'deselect all' [icon button](/components/icon-button) in the header.
> 3. In multi-selection without search, a header checkbox allows for one-click selection or deselection of all items.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
1. In single and multi-selection modes with a search/filter input, an [x-circle-fill](/foundations/icons/x-circle-fill-16) icon button for quick clearing.
2. For multi-selection with search, a 'deselect all' [icon button](/components/icon-button) in the header.
3. In multi-selection without search, a header checkbox allows for one-click selection or deselection of all items.
```

  </Dont>
</DoDontContainer>

> In multi-selections with search capabilities, a **deselect all** [icon button](/components/icon-button) is accessible for easy unselection as soon as one item is selected.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
In multi-selections with search functionality, a **deselect all** [icon button](/components/icon-button) becomes available for easy deselection as soon as one item is selected.
```

  </Dont>
</DoDontContainer>

### Action menu trigger

When the select panel is activated through an [action menu](/components/action-menu), it should be displayed as a modal dialog. It should never be shown as a submenu.

<DoDontContainer>
  <Do>
    <img
      width="464"
      alt="An action menu is presented with multiple items. The first item, 'Visible to...', is currently hovered, and it is annotated with 'Open as modal dialog'."
      src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/980622/22386756-2612-40dd-aceb-1f765095cf17"
    />
    <Caption>When the select panel is triggered by an action menu, it should be presented as a modal dialog.</Caption>
  </Do>
  <Dont>
    <img
      width="464"
      alt="A action menu with multiple items and where the first item 'Visible to' has a arrow on the right of the item and opened a multi select panel upon hover."
      src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/980622/a71c59d6-ca35-49ac-b082-e72aa4d1a8cd"
    />
    <Caption>Avoid displaying the select panel as a non-modal submenu within an action menu.</Caption>
  </Dont>

> </DoDontContainer>

Reviewer 5: Why are we removing this section? I have a feeling we'll get questions on what is possible if we don't include this.

| ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------- |
| <Box as="kbd" backgroundColor="canvas.subtle" borderRadius={1} borderColor="border.default" borderWidth={1} borderStyle="solid" py={1} px={2}>ArrowDown</Box> | Navigate through listbox items. Selection follows focus. |

#### Example behavior

<Box display="grid" gridTemplateColumns={['1fr', null, null, null, '1fr 1fr']} gridGap={5}>
  <div>
    <CustomVideoPlayer
      width="100%"
      src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/40274682/228391029-44ab995b-7a04-4b85-825e-dc77f90838dd.mp4"
    />
    <Caption>
      Keyboard interaction with a single-select select panel demonstrating selection following focus with navigation via
      the ArrowDown key.
    </Caption>
  </div>
</Box>

> 

Reviewer 5: Would you like me to re-record an updated version of this instead of removing it entirely? Selection following focus is often a confused concept.

> For enhanced accessibility, it's important to use explicit saving mechanisms in the select panel. This includes incorporating "Apply" and "Cancel" buttons for both single- and multi-selection scenarios. These buttons provide clear, accessible actions for users to confirm or revoke their selections.

Reviewer 5: We don't need this since the use case of declarative actions is already well covered in the document. This also mentions single select which confuses our guidance earlier in the document.
```suggestion
```

> Automatic saving may be suitable for single selections that do not include additional form controls. In such cases, the selection process is straightforward and does not require further user confirmation, making it accessible and efficient. However, when the selection process involves additional steps or consequences, explicit saving mechanisms are crucial to ensure that all users, including those with accessibility needs, can confidently and accurately manage their selections.

Reviewer 4: Random question, for the "instant selection" or simpler cases for selection without a filter, are these situations where we would prefer folks to use components other than a select panel? (like an actionlist or action menu directly)

> Automatic saving may be suitable for single selections that do not include additional form controls. In such cases, the selection process is straightforward and does not require further user confirmation, making it accessible and efficient. However, when the selection process involves additional steps or consequences, explicit saving mechanisms are crucial to ensure that all users, including those with accessibility needs, can confidently and accurately manage their selections.

Reviewer 5: I think this is similar to my comment on the previous paragraph in that we don't need it because the declarative actions use cases are well covered prior to this. I also don't understand what this paragraph is trying to say, it's vague without examples and a bit lengthy.
